So time to add Firebase Authentication.
Now, we do already have an authentication module in the course, but again there I showed you the more
generic way of authenticating.
Yes, we did use firebase there, but only as a dummy back and we used the Firebase Rest API to send
a regular HTTP request to Firebase.
And then for example, we had to manage that token that identifies the user on our own.
We manually had to attach it to outgoing HTTP requests.
We had to manage its lifetime, we had to validate the token.
All of that had to be done by us.
Now, I did use that approach because I find it super important that, you know, this generic way of
doing it, because you might not always be using Firebase, you might be working with any rest API that
exposes such a sign up or log in endpoint.
And therefore that was crucial information.
However, if you are using Firebase, you can have an easier life by simply using the Firebase Authentication
SDK, an extra package that helps us with creating users, with signing users up, and most importantly,
with managing that token.
You can search for Flutter Firebase off to find that Firebase Auth package and you can simply go to
the installation instructions here.
Grab that dependency and go back to our spec yaml file and added there below cloud fire store.
And now this will download and add this firebase off package to the Flutter project and this package
will make our lives much easier.
Now, for that to work, we first of all need to go back to our Flutter project here in the Web console
and go to authentication there and here under authentication, click on setup, sign and method because
we need to configure this Firebase Project to support authentication before we can use authentication
in our app.
So click on setup sign in method and you've got plenty of signing methods to choose from.
The official Firebase Docs help you with them.
I will go for the traditional email password sign up so click enable here.
Leave the defaults then as they are and click on Save.
And with that enabled we can go back to our application and here in submit off form, I now want to
use the Firebase Auth package which we just added to either create a new user or to log a user in.
So for that, we can check if is log in is true, in which case you want to log a user in or if it's
false, in which case we want to create a new user.
Now for that, we first of all need to import this package, the fiber base off package.
And from that firebase auth dot dot.
And then here.
In the entire screen state class, we can create a new final variable, which I'll name off.
Which is fire bass off dot instance like this.
This will give us an instance to the Firebase Off object, which is automatically set up and managed
by the fire based off package.
We don't need to do anything for that.
It's all managed behind the scenes because of that fire based configuration and linking we did earlier
in this module.
So now we get this off object here.
We can now use this here in the is log in case, for example, to call sign in with email and password.
And this one's two arguments, surprisingly, the email and password so we can forward these two values,
these two variables, email and password, which we're receiving here.
Now, this will log a user in or it will try to do so.
Now sign in with email and password.
Actually returns a future.
Here.
You can tell that it returns a future which will then unwrap itself to an off result in the end.
Now for that, I will add a new variable here which will be of type of result and I'll name it off result.
Which will simply hold that future here.
And now the important thing is, as I just said, this gives us a future, not directly the result.
So to get the off result, I will turn this into a async function by adding async here between the argument
list and the function body.
And then we can await here.
And as you all learned in the course, this will basically wait for this future to complete and then
store the result in the off result variable.
And we can do something similar here in the case, which is the sign up case there we call off and now
it's create user with email and password and we still pass the email and password as arguments to this
function.
So that's pretty straightforward, not too difficult.
We have these two options.
We send these requests.
And again, behind the scenes, Firebase will go ahead, send the request and automatically store the
token if the request succeeds and manage the token lifetime for us.
That's all taken care of.
Now for the username.
We're not doing anything with that yet.
We'll soon do so and we're also not doing something with the auth result here.
Will do so soon to.
One thing I want to do immediately is I want to add error.
Handling this here can fail and when you're using async await you can use try catch to try something
and potentially catch errors.
So here, I'll wrap all of that in a try block and then down there catch any error.
However, not any error.
I want to catch a specific type of error and we can do this with the on keyword.
I want to catch any error of type platform exception.
That should essentially be errors that are thrown by Firebase because we, for example, entered an
invalid email or a invalid password or anything like that.
In that case, I'll set up a message.
An error occurred.
Please check your credentials.
That's the general error message, but we'll also look into the error object we're getting and see if
we have a more specific message there so we can check if error message is unlike null.
So if it's not equal to null, so if we have an error message, in which case I'll override message
and set it equal to error message.
And then if we do have such a message, it would be nice to show, for example, a little message to
the user.
And for this, we can use scaffold off context to show a snack bar.
Now the snack bar is this little message thing that comes up from the bottom of the screen and shows
an error to the user.
And here we create a snack bar by instantiating the snack bar widget which ships with Flutter.
And to snack bar, we can pass the content argument and set up a text widget which shows the message
we want to show.
So it value which is stored in the message variable.
And you can also set the background color of this snack bar.
And here I'll use theme of context dot error color.
And this should be a nice red color for this snack bar.
Now after this.
So after this on platform exception catch block, I'll add another catch block which catches any other
errors we might have.
There shouldn't be many, but in case there are errors, I'll print them here so that we during development
can see them at least.
Okay.
That was a lot of work.
We're not done.
But let's see whether this works thus far.
If I save this and I try to sign up and I enter test the test outcome and I enter a valid password and
enter some username, the username is not getting stored anyways right now so it doesn't matter.
But if I enter some username and I click sign up.
I see no error at least.
I do see an error here regarding the missing plugin exception and a simple app restart should fix this.
So let's close this running process and again restart in general.
If you get such a missing plug in error, simply restart the app entirely and try again.
So let's wait for that to come up again.
And if we now go back and try to create a new account again.
Enter all those credentials.
Click sign up again.
No error here, but an error here.
So let's see what's wrong.
And we see that we have a problem with the scaffold off function.
No scaffold ancestor could be found.
That's essentially the problem we we have here.
Now before we tackle this.
Let's switch to Firebase and go to users there under authentication and you shouldn't see a user there
because something went wrong.
That's the reason why we tried to show that snack bar, but there also something went wrong, so we
got a couple of errors.
The problem here is that on this scaffold.
I'm using a context here to basically tell flutter in which context to render the scaffold.
The problem is here I'm using the context of this off screen and this is actually the wrong context
here.
Instead, we should accept the build context here as an extra argument in submit off form and use this
context instead.
So here, use this argument also for the theme.
Now, you might be wondering where is this build context coming from?
Currently from nowhere, we have to pass it so we have to go to the auth form and for one, make it
clear here on this submit function property that we need to pass the context here because we want it
in that upper screen and therefore we need to pass it here.
So when we call submit function as a last argument, I'll forward my context because this here from
the auth form is the context that actually has access to the surrounding scaffold, which in turn is
the context where the snack bar should be mounted on because offscreen context does not have access
to this scaffold because this scaffold here is rendered by the offscreen.
Now the context of the off screen is one level above that.
So in order to have access to this scaffold on which the snack bar should be rendered, we have to dive
into a widget which is inside that scaffold, and the context of that widget is then the right one.
And that's just the case for all forum.
So with that, we should now at least see an error message.
If I click sign up and I do.
The email address is badly formatted.
Now it looks like a valid email address to me, but it is this extra wide space at the end here which
is causing problems.
Now, this is a bad user experience that we are not able to authenticate because of this.
So therefore I'll go back to the forum widget and when a forward user email ends on, I will actually
call trim on those values to remove any excess whitespace at the beginning and end.
So this will remove any access whitespace on email, password and username and therefore will not get
this error because will not send this white space as part of the email.
So if you now click sign up, this closes and now we get no error.
And now if we go back to the web console and you refresh this users list, you should see your user
here with your email address.
And this was now created by this Firebase off SDK.
So that's pretty, pretty sweet.
We also saw the error handling in action, so that's great too.
And with that, we can create users.
That's a nice first step.
They are now stored and this token, which is sent back by Firebase, is already managed by the Firebase
package.
We don't need to do anything there.
It will even be automatically added to outgoing requests which were later going to send.
So that's entirely happening behind the scenes, which is super, super awesome and takes a lot of work
away from us.
However, the authentication process is not fully finished.
We will later also add image upload, but that will follow.
Well, later.
But one thing I want to do immediately is store the user name and that's currently not happening.
We're getting the username but we're not doing anything with it, so let's make sure we also store the
username.